---
custom_excerpt: |
  An interactive world map for a structured fantasy world generated by an LLM
tag: diary
dependencies:
    - p5
    - p5.dom
    - js.yaml
---

# (Beta Test) An explorable LLM-generated world

* Table of Contents
{:toc}

# Map of Aldreon

<div class="p5js-sketch" id="simple-example-holder">
    <script type="module" src="/scripts/2024-12-11-world-map-exploration/sketch_window.js"></script>
</div>

THIS IS JUST A BETA TEST.

# How to use it

Explore the world by traveling to different destinations and reading the lore.

Click on nodes to travel to them. This will show you a summary of the location. You can expand the summary for a detailed description. New nodes become visible once you visit one of their neigbhors.

Zooming out will let you select broad regions/subregions. You can learn more about the general area. This provides context for some of the destinations within.

"Home" returns you to default position and provides information about the world as a whole.

# About this demo

The world was generated with a tiny Mistral Nemo finetune, so it's going to be pretty incoherent. I just wanted to publish something so that I could source some feedback on the GUI.

The world lore is generated using [my tree method that I previously documented](https://horenbergerb.github.io/2024/11/25/world-building-tree.html). The current world has regions->subregions->destinations. There are 3 regions, 3 subregions per region, and 8 destinations per subregion.

I created an additional algorithm to map that tree structure into an actual world map. To make the map, I started with a 2D plane and randomly divided it in a Voronoi diagram to create the regions. Then, I subdivided each of the region polygons, again using a random Voronoi diagram, to get subregions.

Within the subregion polygons, I randomly generated a node for each destination in that subregion. Then, I randomly connected the nodes, where probability increases as nodes get closer. I also did a final pass to make sure there were no disconnected graphs (i.e. that you can traverse between any two nodes.)

Anyways, This is a super rough demo, but I'm pretty proud of it. Please do leave feedback about the usability and any thoughts on how I might improve it. I'll probably do a more complete blog post in the near future.